All
right.
Good morning, Minister. We are here for our first hearing on the Health
and Safety at Work Act Amendment Bill, and we are
in public session. You're kicking us off.
We've got half an hour of time with you.
You don't have to use it all, but use it as you wish.
I'm sure we'll have time for questions as well, and we'll pass it over to you.
Thank you.
Awesome. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair.
And
this bill
aims to do three main things, cut down on
unnecessary compliance costs,
make it clearer for businesses what is expected of them, and
keeping workers safe by focusing the system on the risks
most likely to cause harm. It does that by making
the rules clearer and more practical so businesses can put
their time and money into things that prevent the worst harm,
not paperwork that doesn't make anyone safer.
It is also about fairness. People should be able to go and do their
work, do their jobs, and come home in one piece.
And when things do go wrong, families deserve to know the system is set
up to prevent the next tragedy and not to argue about forms
and technicalities.
I do want to thank the committee for the work that you're going to be doing on this
bill. It's very important work, and your scrutiny helps make sure the
words on the page match the intent of the law,
and the changes are clear enough for real use in the real world.
Clearer rules help the people doing the work on the ground, the foreman on
site, the manager in a workshop, and the owner/operator
trying to do the right thing. When the expectations are
clear, good businesses can get on with it, and our
regulators can concentrate enforcement on the places where
people are at real risk. With that in mind, the
bill makes a set of clear, practical changes.
A big part of that clarity comes from focusing the
system on critical risks, the hazards that are likely to
result in death, a notifiable injury, illness
or incident, or an occupational disease.
For example, if a load is likely to fall and crush
someone, that is a critical risk. The point is to keep
everyone's attention on the hazards that lead to deaths and serious
injuries, and to make it easier to tell the difference between what
is truly high stakes and what is not.
Other examples are falls from heights, being caught in
unguarded machinery, or working around vehicles that can strike
or crush a person. These are the risks that need strong
controls every time.
This matters for workers and families because the worst incidents are the
ones that change lives forever. It also matters for small
business because many owners tell me that they feel buried under
requirements that don't fit the scale of what it is that they
do. So the bill creates a simpler set of duties for small
businesses. It keeps the focus on the biggest dangers while
still requiring basic standards that every worker should be
able to rely on.
In plain language, if you are a small business, fewer than
20 workers, you must manage your critical risks and
provide basic welfare like decent lighting, bathrooms,
first aid, and emergency plans.
That approach aims to lift safety where it counts
without asking a corner dairy or a small builder to run the
same compliance program as a large corporate.
For larger businesses, the duty to manage all risks
stays in place, but the expectation is clear.
Put your focus into the critical risks first.
To summarize the key features of the bill,
the bill sharpens the focus on critical risks.
It sets clearer, simpler duties for smaller business.
It clarifies what good governance and oversight should look like.
It reduces double handling, where another law already
manages the same safety issue, and it draws clearer
lines around duties and recreational access
situations.
The bill sharpens officers' duties, so expectations are
clearer and more realistic about what good oversight looks like.
It also clarifies
the overlap between laws. So if you've already met a clear safety
requirement under another law for a risk, you will meet the Health and
Safety at Work Act duty too. This should mean that people aren't
complying twice for the same thing.
Getting the wording right for overlapping laws has been tricky,
and I know that there's more work to do to make sure that it doesn't cover
laws that don't regulate the same risks.
I'm keen for the committee to focus on this so that we can get it
right.
The bill also puts clearer limits around the health and safety duties
landowners and occupiers owe to people who come onto their land for
recreation.
Taken together, these changes keep the heart of the health and safety system,
preventing harm, while making it easier to understand what you
must do and for regulators to focus on what matters most.
Finally, I wish to address a misunderstanding I've already heard about.
People think that the bill significantly narrows what you must notify
to WorkSafe. It does not.
Businesses will still need to notify death, serious
injury and illness, and serious incidents.
What the bill does is add clearer definitions and examples so
people can tell what must be reported and WorkSafe can focus
on the events that signal serious harm and near
misses.In conclusion,
this bill is about getting better results, clearer rules,
effort on the highest risks, and fewer families receiving the call
that someone is not coming home. I appreciate the committee's
work to test the detail and improve the drafting so we end up with a law that
is clear, workable, and keeps people safe.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Minister. We have our first question from Jan, and then we'll
move around.
Thank you. And thank you, Minister.
Can we start by, you talked-- and thank you for clarifying some things in
there. You talked about critical risks and what that looks like, and
we know that from the bill. What types of risks do
you and the officials consider are definitely not critical
risks? Because that's what we haven't heard.
So what are not critical risks and
therefore it's getting that understanding that they won't be dealt
with by the small PCBU's or prioritized by
large PCBUs.
So I think
the definition is relatively clear at the moment that the
critical risks are defined as hazards likely to result in
death, notifiable injury, illness or incident, or an
occupational disease. And so therefore doesn't
capture things like putting up posters.
But I'm happy for Hayden here, who's our expert
within WRS, to go into a little bit more of the definition.
Yes. So it'll be things like lower grade
strains, so minor strains-
Sorry, I didn't hear that first part.
Sorry.
Lower grade strains, very minor strains, a very minor
nick or cut.
So things that are at the very much lower level that you wouldn't
expect to require any hospital treatment.
Mm.
Maybe some minor first aid, and that resolve themselves fairly
quickly.
Does psychosocial come into that as well, or would that be a
critical risk?
In some circumstances, yes. So,
under the act currently, there's no notification
requirement around psychosocial harm per se.
So just psychosocial harm isn't a notifiable event.
Where it does come in under the act currently is hazard is
defined as including a
psychosocial harm, trauma, fatigue that will
potentially lead to a physical injury.
So that's the main area it comes in.
If fatigue or
shock trauma is likely to lead to physical harm in
some way, for instance, you're a train driver and you
witness an incident where someone is killed, that
is very likely to affect your ability to
effectively be a train driver, and that will create physical
risks to yourself and other people.
So that is definitely a critical risk.
In the emergency services area, they would definitely be a critical
risk. But
me in my work feeling stressed is unlikely to be a
physical-- a critical risk because there's no risk
of physical harm to anyone else from me being
slightly overworked or stressed at work.
Thank you.
Great. We have a supplementary on that from Shannon, and then we'll move on to the
next item.
Yeah. Is armed robbery classed as critical risk, and if not, why?
In a lot of circumstances, yes.
Because there is that risk of physical harm
from an armed robbery or any sort of
aggression
in a retail context from customers, that is likely to need to be
managed as a critical risk.
Next primary from Palm J.
Thank you. Minister, about the changes regarding PCBU.
So what was that based on? What kind of feedback did you receive from the sector,
from businesses to make those changes regarding small PCBU versus
the overall like other PCBUs in this legislation?
So if you could elaborate on that, that would be really helpful.
Yeah, thank you for your question.
Look, when I did the health and safety roadshow, which feels like a very long
time ago now, but I cast my mind back,
we heard a lot from people who run small businesses
who said that life running a business is just too
hard and it's far too complicated, and needing to manage
all risk
at all stages was just too much when they're also in charge of
payroll and HR functions. And in many cases
you've got the manager doing essentially three or four different full-time
jobs.
What we heard was quite clear that there is huge
uncertainty about what it is that a small business owner or a
manager is needing to do to comply with the law.
And it shouldn't be that hard, which is why we've decided to go down the
path of having a carve-out for small business.
That they shouldn't under any circumstances have the same
expectation of having an entire corporate
HR function that a large business has.
But they should be able to be able to look at what it
is that they're doing on the shop floor, any actions that
could lead to death and serious injury or illness, and not
worry about sweating the small stuff because we did hear about a lot of
companies putting up posters, doing
unnecessary training modules, just putting in place very
expensive
paperwork files that just sit in the bookcase just in case
WorkSafe turns up if they're audited, but no one's actually reading
these hundreds of pages of documents.
So trying to simplify it down for anybody who's trying to run
a small operation is the overall goal.
Great. Next primary question from Carl.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister.
And thanks for the work that you've done on this.One of the things that has just
been described around the cut or the nick
creates still a gray area for small business.
And I suppose if we're wanting to see a shift in the
way small businesses manage these risks,
was there any consideration given to making that line
black and white, and being able to go, "This sits here and that
sits there," so that small businesses don't end up
in a space either where they're trying to work through making that decision
themselves, or in the future, there's
litigation from WorkSafe that determines that
and ultimately puts cost on those businesses?
Mm. It's a really interesting question, and I think from what I'm
hearing, it's about how do you define it and get the level of
definition right.
I think that would be a really good question for you to raise with the officials as
you go through the select committee process.
But ultimately, there's going to be quite a difficulty of
trying to list every possible thing that could go wrong within a
law,
rather than leaving it up to the businesses themselves to
define what it is that they specifically do as functions and actions within
their own companies. Because if we tried to list off every
single action that could happen,
I think we might end up with a very, very, very long law.
But
that is something for you to tease out with the officials of-
Mm
... does the definition of critical risk
go too far or does it not go far enough?
Does there actually need to be more complexity in there?
So just a supplementary on that. Is it your intention as a minister with
this bill that it is WorkSafe's role to
support the organizations as they go through the change,
understanding now where they sit, what the responsibility is, and how they fit
because,
previously as an employer,
and understanding
what's a near miss in terms of reportable, what's...
And because everyone sees their incident as being significant to
themselves or to their department potentially, so how do you see that going
through
the organization in support of this change?
Yeah. So I definitely see WorkSafe playing more of a guidance
function.
That had become very clear when we were doing the roadshow, that people were afraid
of WorkSafe-
Mm
... and very afraid of reaching out for help,
especially if they wanted someone to be able to help check that what they were
doing was actually compliant with the law.
They were more fearful that if they reached out for help, they'd get pinged for
it rather than given any assistance.
One of the changes within the law is making it very clear
that WorkSafe will have more of a guidance role.
For the businesses themselves,
where there is an industry standard that will be set
through the approved codes of practice, that will come as a huge guide and help
to businesses from all sizes about what it is that they
specifically need to do to comply with the law, as the approved codes of
practice will get developed over time and actually have a lot of on
the ground relevant practical use within those approved codes of
practice, which will become industry standard and helpful for every
business. And WorkSafe will be signing off on those-
Mm
... and that will give businesses a lot more confidence that if they follow that
approved code of practice, they have actually done what they need to do to comply
with the law. So I'm very hopeful that the approved codes of practice fill
those gray areas that currently exist.
Thank you. That's helpful. Vanessa.
Minister, thank you for that clarification about
the guidance role.
Mm.
Who will form the function
of being the monitor and being the person who checks that compliance is
happening or investigates and prosecutes and does all that?
Well, that would still be the same WorkSafe function that exists now-
Okay
... which are the inspectors on the ground.
Yeah.
We have been doing a
lot more training with some of our WorkSafe inspectors
to make sure that they know that they have more of a guidance function.
Mm-hmm.
But happy for Hayden to pop in about any of the definitions.
Yeah. So just wanting to, just to clarify that we're not
taking away the ability to do that for
WorkSafe and saying-
Oh, no
... you are just to guide them.
No.
No, no, no, no.
Because I think that may have been a misinterpretation that some people-
Mm. Mm
... had from this, is that
the intention is that we still carry out these functions,
because that's very important.
Mm-hmm.
Mm.
But as well as that,
there's a guidance function prior to that. Okay. Thank you.
Yeah. Absolutely.
Is that right?
There's definitely no goal here that WorkSafe would not be prosecuting or
enforcing the law. But it's simply the case that what we've been
hearing out on the ground is that there hasn't been enough
upfront guidance-
Mm
... coming out from WorkSafe-
... to actually be able to say as a regulator what it is that people
need to be doing right or wrong before they'll get
an infringement notice or a fine or a prosecution.
Okay.
Perfect.
Thank you.
Thank you. Jan.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister.
As I've read all of the submissions, there seems to be universal
confusion over the word likely in Clause 9, sub-
Mm
... the Section 22A and B-
... and the adding in there of 22A and B.
Can you define please what likely to result means
in the definition of critical risk so that we can get clarity and
we can ask those questions of submitters when they're coming in?
Mm-hmm.
So that is a technical definition, so I'll pass to
Hayden because I don't write likely into the law.
That's what our officials do for us.
Mm-hmm.
So we had this in your initial briefing.
It's-
Yeah. So I just wanted some clarification because I've now read the submissions.
Yeah. Probable foreseeable risk of harm.
So it's more than being possible but less than being certain.
Now,
there is judgment involved,
but any test we use will need judgment.
There's no perfectly objective, clear test
that you can have under a health and safety work
system
that will get you there. In some of the submissions, they suggest
using
reasonably foreseeable. That's
just a different sort of judgment.
Mm.
You're not going to be able to get away from having a judgment somewhere.
And it's how you describe that judgment and the standard, which is the question
that-
Okay